"Adventure Background",
"Beginning the Adventure"

"1-1: Eastern Fields",
"1-2: Lumber Yard",
"1-3: Festival Tree",
"1-4: Lucinda New’s House",
"1-5: Newville Constabulary",
"1-6: Shrine to Father Newvus",
"1-7: The Twelve Days Inn",
"Newville Rumor Table",
"1-8: Newville Homes",
"No Shops?!"

"2-1: A Winter War Zone",
"2-2: Wayward Skeleton",
"2-3: Crueltide Greetings",
"2-4: There Arose Such a Splatter",
"2-5: Avalanche"

"3-1: Entry Chamber",
"3-2: Crueltide Barracks",
"3-3: Crueltide Workshop",
"3-4: Stables",
"3-5: Sleigh Hanger",
"Epilogue"





Appendix A: New Monsters
Despite its wintry beauty, Newville Valley is filled with all manner of
dangerous monsters and strange creatures. While the Referee is free to
include whatever creatures he or she feels are appropriate, the bizarre new
beasties featured in this adventure are detailed below.
Crueltide Elf
Small humanoid (goblinoid), chaotic evil
Armor Class 13 (leather armor)
Hit Points 18 (4d6 + 4)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (–1) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 8 (–1) 10 (+0) 7 (–2)
Skills Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Nimble Escape. The Crueltide elf can take the Disengage or
Hide action as a bonus action on each of its turns.
Actions
Shovel Spear. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage.
Crueltide Contraption (recharge 4-6). The Crueltide elf
retrieves one of its deadly contraptions from its bag and
begins using it (roll or choose from the table below). The
Crueltide elf has +4 on its attack rolls for thrown or fired
contraptions. Note: certain contraptions such as Rider
Red’s Bee-Bee Crossbow may be used for multiple rounds
without requiring another use of this ability or successful
recharge roll.
These strange goblinoid beasts have been corrupted by the influences
of Orcus and the dark forces of winter. They have wicked, inhuman grins
filled with needle-like teeth, sallow orange skin, and unusually pointed
ears. They wield weapons of crudely crafted iron that leave jagged and
painful wounds and laugh and cackle as they fight. They wear ridiculous
red-and-green motley and often accentuate their outfits with curled-toe
shoes. Many wear bells atop their pointed caps.
Despite their name, Crueltide elves are not true elves. They simply
call themselves such for their own twisted enjoyment. They are instead
a strange sub-race of goblins, though they are quite skilled at mechanical
engineering — especially when it comes to designing deadly toys. Each
Crueltide elf carries a bag containing several Crueltide contraptions —
wicked and deadly toys — that they gleefully use in battle. The table
below lists various Crueltide contraptions, but you are free to invent more
for the wicked little goblins to use.

Crueltide Contraptions
Crueltide elves carry a small pouch that contains Crueltide contraptions:
1. {@b Easy Burn Oven.} This small metal box generates enormous heat when cooking cakes no larger than a gold piece. One round after being activated, the Easy Burn Oven flies open in a gout of fire and fills a 20-foot-radius area around it with thick, vision-obstructing smoke. The area is heavily obscured, and all spellcasters within the area must succeed on a Concentration check or have their spells fail as they cough and sputter in the smoke. The smoke disperses after 1d4 rounds.
2. {@b Mini-Rocket Cart.} These tiny metal and wooden carts carry a small but deadly payload of oil and fire. They have a wind-up key on the side. After being wound up as an action, the Mini-Rocket Cart travels 30 feet forward in whatever direction it has been pointed and explodes, requiring all creatures within 10 feet to make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw. Creatures who fail take 4 (1d8) force damage, while those who succeed take half this amount.
3. {@b Rider Red’s Bee-Bee Crossbow.} A child-sized hand crossbow with a strange collection of gears, flywheels, and pulleys, this tiny weapon fires a projectile at dangerous velocity. It fires standard crossbow bolts but inflicts 1d12 piercing damage with a range of 20/100 feet. However, it is notoriously inaccurate, and all attacks made with the Rider Red’s Bee-Bee Crossbow have disadvantage. If the attacker rolls a natural 1 on their attack, the bolt ricochets and hits the operator in the eye, causing the eye to be lost until powerful healing magic can be applied. The crossbow typically comes with five bolts.
4. {@b Snow-Wrapped Caltrop.} These are simply large snowballs with nasty, rusted caltrops at their center. They can be thrown up to 30 feet and still remain effective. They inflict 1d4 + 1 piercing damage upon a successful attack. The ensuing wound bleeds for another 1d2 necrotic damage at the end of the target’s next turn.
5. {@b Wind-up Toy Soldier.} This tiny tin militia man has a large wind-up key that requires an action to crank. The soldier marches forward and opens fire with its adorable but deadly crossbow on the nearest target. It can fire once each round for three rounds before it runs out of ammunition and falls dormant. The soldier’s ammunition reloads in one day when it can be wound up and used again. Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 20/120 ft., one creature. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage.
6. {@b Wendy Wetsie Doll.} This creepy, glass-eyed porcelain doll whines loudly for one round after a small button on its back is pressed. It can be thrown up to 40 feet. On the following round, it falls silent, and an impossibly large pool of slick, stinking yellow liquid spews forth from the doll, making a 20-foot-radius area around Wendy Wetsie extraordinarily slick and difficult to traverse. Anyone attempting to cross the soiled area must succeed on a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw or fall prone, and the area is considered difficult terrain.





{
									"type": "table",
									"caption": "Crueltide Contraptions",
									"colLabels": [
										"1d8",
										"Rumor"
									],
									"colStyles": [
										"",
										""
									],
									"rows": [
										[
											"1",
											"{@b Easy Burn Oven.} This small metal box generates enormous heat when cooking cakes no larger than a gold piece. One round after being activated, the Easy Burn Oven flies open in a gout of fire and fills a 20-foot-radius area around it with thick, vision-obstructing smoke. The area is heavily obscured, and all spellcasters within the area must succeed on a Concentration check or have their spells fail as they cough and sputter in the smoke. The smoke disperses after 1d4 rounds."
										],
										[
											"2",
											"{@b Mini-Rocket Cart.} These tiny metal and wooden carts carry a small but deadly payload of oil and fire. They have a wind-up key on the side. After being wound up as an action, the Mini-Rocket Cart travels 30 feet forward in whatever direction it has been pointed and explodes, requiring all creatures within 10 feet to make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw. Creatures who fail take 4 (1d8) force damage, while those who succeed take half this amount."
										],
										[
											"3",
											"{@b Rider Red’s Bee-Bee Crossbow.} A child-sized hand crossbow with a strange collection of gears, flywheels, and pulleys, this tiny weapon fires a projectile at dangerous velocity. It fires standard crossbow bolts but inflicts 1d12 piercing damage with a range of 20/100 feet. However, it is notoriously inaccurate, and all attacks made with the Rider Red’s Bee-Bee Crossbow have disadvantage. If the attacker rolls a natural 1 on their attack, the bolt ricochets and hits the operator in the eye, causing the eye to be lost until powerful healing magic can be applied. The crossbow typically comes with five bolts."
										],
										[
											"4",
											"{@b Snow-Wrapped Caltrop.} These are simply large snowballs with nasty, rusted caltrops at their center. They can be thrown up to 30 feet and still remain effective. They inflict 1d4 + 1 piercing damage upon a successful attack. The ensuing wound bleeds for another 1d2 necrotic damage at the end of the target’s next turn."
										],
										[
											"5",
											"{@b Wind-up Toy Soldier.} This tiny tin militia man has a large wind-up key that requires an action to crank. The soldier marches forward and opens fire with its adorable but deadly crossbow on the nearest target. It can fire once each round for three rounds before it runs out of ammunition and falls dormant. The soldier’s ammunition reloads in one day when it can be wound up and used again. Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 20/120 ft., one creature. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage."
										],
										[
											"6",
											"{@b Wendy Wetsie Doll.} This creepy, glass-eyed porcelain doll whines loudly for one round after a small button on its back is pressed. It can be thrown up to 40 feet. On the following round, it falls silent, and an impossibly large pool of slick, stinking yellow liquid spews forth from the doll, making a 20-foot-radius area around Wendy Wetsie extraordinarily slick and difficult to traverse. Anyone attempting to cross the soiled area must succeed on a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw or fall prone, and the area is considered difficult terrain."
										]
									]
								}










Demonic Reindeer
Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12)
Speed 30 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 17 (+3) 14 (+2) 8 (–1) 12 (+1) 6 (–2)
Saving Throws Str +5, Con +4
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, Common
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Dashing Gore. If the demonic reindeer moves at least 30
feet straight toward a target and then hits it with an Antlers
attack, the attack deals an extra 9 (2d8) piercing damage
to the target. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on
a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or be knocked prone.
Innate Spellcasting. The demonic reindeer’s innate spellcasting
ability is Charisma. It can innately cast haste (self only) once
per day, requiring no material components:
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage.
Antlers. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage.
Fire Breath (recharge 6). The demonic reindeer exhales fire in
a 60-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that area
must make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, taking 17 (5d6)
fire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one.
Almost 9 feet long and 6 feet tall, these fire-eyed beasts appear to be
stags spat out of some dark corner of hell. Some claim they are some
demonic form of a peryton. Their yellow eyes flicker like embers, and
their teeth are as black as obsidian. Ashen-gray fur is often matted with
blood, and their antlers look as if crafted from blood-soaked bone.



Frosted Snowman
Medium construct, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 37 (5d8 + 15)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15(+2) 12 (+1) 16 (+3) 5 (–3) 10 (+0) 10 (+0)
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +3 (+9 in snow)
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances piercing
Damage Immunities acid, cold, poison, psychic
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Sneak Attack. Once per turn, the frosted snowman can deal
an extra 2d6 damage to one creature it hits with an attack
if it has advantage on the attack roll.
Mind of Winter. If a creature starts its turn within 30 feet of the
frosted snowman and the two of them can see each other,
the frosted snowman can force the creature to make a
DC 12 Wisdom saving throw if the frosted snowman isn’t
incapacitated. On a failed save, the creature stares into the
depthless coal eyes of the frosted snowman, contemplates
the emptiness of its existence, and is stunned for 1 round. A
creature that isn’t surprised can avert its eyes to avoid the
saving throw at the start of its turn. If it does so, it can’t see
the frosted snowman until the start of its next turn, when it
can avert its eyes again. If it looks at the frosted snowman in
the meantime, it must immediately make the save.
Actions
Multiattack. The frosted snowman makes two melee attacks,
only one of which can be a Carrot Nose attack.
Stick Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage plus 3 (1d6) cold damage.
Carrot Nose. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) cold
damage. This attack is magical.
Bonus Actions
Snow Drift. The frosted snowman disappears into the snow on
which it stands and silently reappears in an unoccupied
space within 100 feet of its original position that is also
covered in snow. As part of this action, the frosted snowman
may make a Dexterity (Stealth) roll to remain undetected.
Frosted snowmen are malicious spirits of winter that seek to
destroy any warm-blooded creatures they encounter.
Though they appear to be a simple carrot-nosed snowman,
frosted snowmen strike with sudden swiftness. They attack
with their sharp stick arms but can also yank their carrot
noses from their faces to wield as deadly daggers.


Nokuy the Red
Small humanoid (goblinoid), chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (chain shirt)
Hit Points 33 (6d6 + 12)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14(+2) 15 (+2) 14 (+2) 8 (–1) 10 (+0) 12 (+1)
Skills Intimidation +3, Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Nimble Escape. Nokuy the Red can take the Disengage or
Hide action as a bonus action on each of his turns.
Actions
Pickaxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. A creature hit by
the pickaxe takes 3 (1d6) necrotic damage at the end of
its next turn.
Crueltide Contraption (recharge 4-6). Nokuy the Red retrieves
one of his deadly contraptions from his bag and begins
using it (roll or choose from the table above under Crueltide
Elf). Nokuy the Red has +4 on his attack rolls for thrown or
fired contraptions. Note: Certain contraptions such as Rider
Red’s Bee-Bee Crossbow may be used for multiple rounds
without requiring another use of this ability or successful
recharge roll.




Orcus’ Claws
Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 123 (13d10 + 52)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19(+4) 15 (+2) 19 (+4) 18 (+4) 17 (+3) 15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +8, Wis +7, Cha +6
Skills Perception +7, Religion +8
Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, necrotic
Damage Immunities cold, poison; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)
Magic Resistance. Orcus’ Claws has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. Orcus’ Claws’ attacks are magical.
Sauerkraut and Toadstool Sandwich with Arsenic Sauce. Orcus’
Claws may eat this sandwich as an action; it has the effect of
a potion of superior healing.
Actions
Multiattack. Orcus’ Claws makes two Skull Staff attacks and
one Tail attack.
Skull Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 39.5 ft., one
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) piercing damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving thrown or
take 7 (2d6) cold damage and be frozen solid in ice for
1 minute. While frozen, the creature is incapacitated and
takes 7 (2d6) cold damage at the start of each of Orcus’
Claws’ turns. A frozen creature may make a DC 15 Strength
check to break free at the end of each of its turns, ending
the effect on itself on a success. If Orcus’ Claws rolls a 19 or
a 20 on a Skull Staff attack and hits a creature frozen in this
manner, the creature is shattered to pieces and dies. Only
a resurrection spell or similarly powerful magic can restore
such a character to life.
Cruel Tidings (1/day). Orcus’ Claws cries out in a twisted singsong
voice, “Bloody Solstice to all, and to all a great blight!” All
creatures within 120 feet who hear his words must succeed on
a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or immediately turn and attack
their nearest ally for 1 minute. A target who has no allies within
30 feet is unaffected. A target who succumbs to the Cruel
Tidings can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Lump of Coal (recharge 5-6). Orcus summons a dark ball of
Abyssal energy and throws it at one target within 50 feet
of him. If the target is a creature, it must make a DC 16
Dexterity saving throw, taking 17 (5d6) fire damage on a
failure, and half as much fire damage on a success.
This strange aspect of the Demon Prince Orcus is crafted in the deepest
pits of the Abyss by taking a single shaving from one of the Prince of the
Undead’s claws and freezing it in the coldest part of the under realm while
enchanting it with vile magic. The creature it spews forth, aptly known
as Orcus’ Claws, is but a fragment of its progenitor’s essence, but similar
in appearance and extraordinarily powerful. Orcus’ Claws is a corpulent
beast standing 7ft tall, wearing a bloody mantle and stocking cap.


Pixie
Tiny fey, neutral good
Armor Class 16
Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5)
Speed 20ft., fly 60ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (–2) 20 (+5) 12 (+1) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 16 (+3)
Skills Deception +5, Nature +5, Perception +6, Stealth +9
Senses passive Perception 16
Languages Common, Sylvan
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Magic Resistance. The pixie has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Innate Spellcasting. The pixie’s innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC13). It can cast the following spells,
requiring only its pixie dust as a component:
At-will: druidcraft, greater invisibility (self only)
1/day each: confusion, dancing lights, detect evil and good,
detect thoughts, dispel magic, entangle, fly, polymorph,
sleep
Actions
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 8 (1d6 + 5) piercing damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 80/320ft.,
one target. Hit: 9 (1d6 + 5) piercing damage.


Snowbeast
Huge giant, chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 95 (10d12 + 30)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
21(+5) 10 (+0) 17 (+3) 3 (–4) 10 (+0) 7 (–2)
Damage Immunities cold
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Blind Rage. When the snowbeast first takes damage, it
becomes enraged, gains 20 temporary hit points, and
fights to the death.
Charm Immunity. The snowbeast is immune to all mindaffecting
magic such as the charm monster spell.
Rend. If the snowbeast hits a single target with both a Bite
attack and a Claws attack in the same turn, it inflicts an
additional 12 (2d6 + 5) force damage to that target.
Siege Monster. The snowbeast deals double damage to
objects and structures.
Actions
Multiattack. The snowbeast makes one Bite attack and one
Claws attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (1d10 + 5) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage.
This towering, 12-foot-tall monstrosity with beady yellow eyes is
covered in white fur and has a maw of flat, grinding teeth. It wants only
to feast and devour, with no greater intellect or plan. It attacks the nearest
foe without any thought to tactics or strategy.


The Dentist
Small humanoid (goblinoid), chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (studded leather armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d6 + 12)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13(+1) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 10 (+0) 10 (+0)
Skills Intimidation +2, Medicine +2, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Nimble Escape. The Dentist can take the Disengage or Hide
action as a bonus action on each of his turns.
Extraction. If The Dentist rolls a 19 or a 20 on a Pliers attack roll
and the target creature has teeth, The Dentist has pulled a
tooth from his target’s mouth.
Actions
Pliers. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. A creature hit by
the pliers is grappled by The Dentist (escape DC 14). While
grappled, a creature has disadvantage on Dexterity saving
throws. If The Dentist starts his turn with a target grappled,
he automatically inflicts 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage to
that target.
Crueltide Contraption (recharge 4-6). The Dentist retrieves
one of his deadly contraptions from his bag and begins
using it (roll or choose from the table above under Crueltide
Elf). The Dentist has +5 on his attack rolls for thrown or fired
contraptions. Note: certain contraptions such as Rider
Red’s Bee-Bee Crossbow may be used for multiple rounds
without requiring another use of this ability or successful
Recharge roll.


Winter Bones
Large undead, neutral
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 85 (10d10 + 30)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14(+2) 19 (+4) 16 (+3) 17 (+3) 13 (+1) 12 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Int +6, Wis +3
Skills Acrobatics +7, History +9, Nature +9, Perception +3
Damage Resistances lightning, necrotic; piercing and
slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities cold, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Turn Resistance. The winter bones has advantage on saving
throws against any effect that turns undead.
Actions
Dancing Fool (recharge 6). The winter bones creates a
magical compulsion field in a 60-foot radius around itself.
Each creature in the area when the effect begins, or who
enters the area, must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving
throw or dance violently and maniacally, causing harm to
itself. An affected creature is restrained and takes 3 (1d6)
force damage. The effect lasts for 1 minute, and affected
creatures continue to dance even if no longer in the area
of effect or if the winter bones is killed. At the start of each
of the winter bones’ turns, each affected creature takes 3
(1d6) force damage for every round it has been dancing,
including the current round. An affected creature may
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success. Undead and
creatures immune to charm are not affected by this ability.
Once a creature succeeds on a saving throw against this
effect, it is immune to the winter bones’ Dancing Fool ability
for 24 hours. Casting dispel magic or remove curse on an
affected creatures removes the effect from that creature.
This strange winter spirits appears to mortal eyes like a frost-ravaged
scarecrow that somehow came to life. It is long-limbed and stands more
than 7ft tall. It has spindly limbs and a skeletal face and is clad only in a
long black tabard. Winter Bones dances merrily through the snow, flitting
from tree to tree. Winter Bones moves swiftly and silently through the harsh
frozen landscape, never leaving signs of its passing unless it so desires.
If attacked, Winter Bones laughs merrily, dancing deftly around its foes
and singing ancient songs of the season.
Winter Bones is not, by nature, a violent creature. He is, however, insanely
curious about all things and typically wants only to talk and make inquiries
of those he encounters. Only when he is met with violence or extreme
rudeness does he use force his enemies to dance for his pleasure and most
often he leaves soon after, vanishing into the winter wonderland around him
in search of better-behaved playthings. If slain, it is whispered that Winter
Bones simply rises again with the next snowfall, as curious as ever.




Appendix B: New Magic Items
Newville Valley is home to several unique magic items that are detailed
below.

Frozen Concoction
Potion, uncommon
When you drink this frosty dwarven beverage, you gain a climbing
speed equal to your walking speed for 1 hour. During this time, you have
advantage on Strength (Athletics) checks you make to climb or to prevent
yourself from being disarmed.

Talisman of the Newville Protector
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement)
These simple bronze brooches are shaped like a pockmarked circular
shield but have an uncanny resemblance to a chocolate-chip cookie. While
attuned and actively defending Newville or its people, you receive a +1
bonus to your Armor Class and to all saving throws. Outside the Newville
Valley, these are simple bronze badges.

Cane of Winter’s Shepherd
Rod, very rare (requires attunement)
This long white shepherd’s crook is striped with a band of red and
functions as a +1 staff though you gain several additional benefits. First,
while you are attuned to the cane, your breath is always minty fresh, and
you can cast purify food and drink and neutralize poison three times per
day each. The food or beverage you make is perfectly edible and has a
slight mint flavoring.

Dagger of the Winter Wonderland
Weapon (dagger), very rare
This strange poniard resembles a carrot perpetually glazed in frost. It
functions as a +1 dagger and once per day allows you to reappear on a
patch of snow you can see within 100 feet provided you are standing on
a patch of snow. In addition, you receive a +2 bonus to all saving throws
made against any cold-based effects or damage.


Appendix C:
Orcus’ Christmas Slay
How does Orcus’ Claws get around the world in a single night to bring
holiday fear to all the little girls and boys on the Prime Material Plane?
Why, with his big red slay — err, sleigh, of course! This massive sleigh is
blood red and carved from gnarled, burnt wood. Its runners are rusted with
blood and the long bench seat at its front is terribly uncomfortable to sit
upon. Its leather reins are burnt black with hellfire and crack with unholy
power, while its bells “jingle” with the tiny screams of those who have
found themselves on the “naughty list.”
If Orcus’ Claws is defeated, his Slay becomes an unbound magical
artifact. The magic laid upon it can be harnessed by adventurers willing to
undertake a series of long and difficult quests to gather all the components
necessary to operate the Slay. Orcus’ Christmas Slay is made up of
several components: the sleigh, the reins, and the bells. While each of
these components has inherent power, when the three are brought together
along with Orcus’ eight demonic reindeer and bound under a new master,
their dark energies are released full upon the world.


The Sleigh
Painted red with blood, set upon rails of the coldest iron, and capable of
holding countless corpses in rotting sacks, the sleigh of Orcus is a massive
wooden sleigh measuring thirty feet long and twenty feet wide. The walls
of its bed rise ten feet in the air. It is icy cold to the touch and radiates an
unholy aura to any who are sensitive to the presence of the dark powers
of the world.
The sleigh itself possesses several strange magical properties. It only
needs to be pulled by a single horse (who moves at its normal speed
when pulling the sleigh), though the poor beast of burden withers and
sickens after a week of being tasked with pulling the horrid winter sled.
In another week, the wretched creature is emaciated to the point of death.
This damage is unrecoverable, save by divine intervention or the use of
a wish spell. If left tied to the sleigh overnight, the horse (or other draft
beast) rises as a zombie, bound forever to the service of the sleigh master.
The draft animal, regardless of its form, gains the following features
when it reaches the point of becoming undead:
• It becomes an undead, and gains immunity to poison damage and the
poisoned condition.
• It gains the following additional features:
Favored Terrain. Whenever the creature is moving through
snow covered terrain or blood-soaked battlefields, its
speed is doubled.
Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces the creature to 0 hit
points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC
of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or
from a critical hit. On a success, the creature drops to 1 hit
point instead.
In addition, the sleigh functions as a portable hole for any object placed
in the bed. The item vanishes in an icy blast of brimstone when placed
there and can be recalled by reaching back into the bed at any time.
However, each time an item is retrieved there is a cumulative 1% chance
that a demonic creature springs forth from this terrible abyssal portal to
devour those who would dare deface the sleigh of their master.
The sleigh itself is impervious to all forms of damage and can only
be removed from creation by having a bless spell cast upon it, and then
wished out of existence.


The Reins
The reins of Orcus’s Slay appear at first glance to be a long, leather
whip burnt black and laced with shards of jagged metal. In fact, the reins
function as a +3 whip that radiates a faint aura of evil enchantment and
functions as a sword of wounding.
If the reins are brought within fifty feet of Orcus’s sleigh, the wielder
can use a bonus action to command the reins to leap from the hand of their
wielder and wrap themselves around the sleigh, ready to be held by the
driver. While the sleigh and the reins are together, any character aboard
the sleigh receives a measure of protection as the reins animate to defend
them. Anyone within thirty feet of the sleigh that is hostile to the sleigh or
any of its riders finds themselves the target of an animated lashing from
the reins, which leap out with wicked accuracy on initiative count 20. The
reins make three attacks with a +6 attack bonus, and inflict 5 (1d4 + 3)
slashing damage and inflict wounds as normal.
The reins, whether functioning as a whip or as protection for sleigh
riders, can only be destroyed by having a bless spell cast upon then and
then wished out of existence.


The Bells
The last and most nefarious of Orcus’ Christmas Slay are the bells.
Similar to the reins, the bells are a string of cold, grey bells cast in lead.
Their ring is low and hollow, completely atonal and without any sense
of music and beauty. They are set into a broad, three-foot-long black
leather strap that matches the reins. There is even a tiny clasp on the bells,
allowing them to be worn as a bracer.
When worn, the bells ring with a discordant jangle that all living beings
that can hear them find disconcerting and disturbing. Concentration and
focus become nigh-impossible as these crackling sounds bounce around
inside the skulls of any that hear them. When the wielder makes an attack
roll while wearing the bells and hits, the target has disadvantage on its
next attack roll, and has disadvantage on any Constitution saving throw to
maintain concentration until the beginning of its next turn.
If the bells are touched to a creature or creatures hitched to the sleigh,
they wrap around the beast (or beasts) and entwine themselves with
the sleigh. Such beasts can travel without growing tired from sunset to
sunrise and receive a +2 bonus to their Armor Class. However, these
poor creatures are forever tainted and must feast on at least one pound of
human flesh every day or perish.
Once per day, the wearer can also summon forth a demonic reindeer. The
demonic reindeer lasts for 1 minute and follows the wearer’s commands,
though it can only be summoned once per day regardless of how long the
creature remains. It is completely loyal to the wearer and if it is destroyed
then one week of time must pass before it can be summoned again.
Corruption of Christmas
A character whose alignment is not chaotic evil making use of or
carrying one of the artifacts that comprise Orcus’s Christmas Slay runs
the risk of their heart shrinking three times too small. Each time they draw
upon the power of any one of the above items, the character must make a
DC 17 Charisma saving throw. If the character is carrying two pieces of
Orcus’s Christmas Slay, the DC to resist the taint of Orcus’s Christmas
Slay is 19. If the character has all three components, the DC to resist is 21.
On a failed saving throw, the character’s alignment shifts one step
towards chaotic evil. On a successful saving throw, the character is
immune to the influence of the Slay and its components for 24 hours.
Any character who dies while in possession of any one of these artifacts
rises from the grave on the following Christmas Eve as a Crueltide elf,
bound in service to Orcus’ Claws. This is an eternal, unbreakable bond.
While the character’s corpse rots, waiting to return to life as a Crueltide
elf, it cannot be resurrected or reincarnated by any power short of a wish.
Completing Orcus’s Slay
If a character manages to get their hands on all three components
and combines the three under the light of winter’s full moon, they have
summoned forth the heralds of Orcus’ Claws — whether they meant to
or not.
Eight demonic reindeer rise from the snow at compass points around
Orcus’s Christmas Slay and immediately attack the character who brought
the components together as well as anyone else within 120 feet that seems
to be a threat. They fight with great ferocity, adding a d4 to all attack
rolls and saving throws that they make for 1 minute. In addition, they
are immune to any and all effects of the various components of Orcus’s
Christmas Slay.
In addition, the bells begin to ring endlessly at their arrival, and each
creature within 30 feet of the bells must make a DC 17 Wisdom saving
throws at the beginning of its turns. On a failed saving throw, the target
has disadvantage on its next attack roll and on any Constitution saving
throws to maintain Concentration. On a successful saving throw, the target
is immune to this effect for 24 hours.
If by some miracle the characters are able to defeat the eight demonic
reindeer, Orcus’s Christmas Slay and all its components become forever
bound to the character that inflicted the most damage during the battle.
That character vanishes on the following midnight, seemingly lost forever.
But don’t worry, a new Orcus’ Claws returns on Christmas Day...